Red is any of a number of similar colors evoked by light consisting predominantly of the longest wavelengths of light discernible by the human eye, in the wavelength range of roughly 625–750 nm. Longer wavelengths than this are called infrared, or below red and cannot be seen by human eyes.

In human color psychology, red is associated with anger, death, blood, passion and love.

Red is used as one of the additive primary colors of light, complementary to cyan, in RGB color systems. It was once considered to be a subtractive primary color, and is still sometimes described as such in non-scientific literature; however, the colors cyan, magenta and yellow are now known to be a better set of subtractive primary colors, and are used in modern color printing.
Artificial red poppies.
Artificial red poppies.

One common use of red as an additive primary color is in the RGB color model. Because "red" is not by itself standardized, color mixtures based on red are not exact specifications of color either. In order to produce exact colors the color red needs to be defined in terms of an absolute color space such as sRGB. As used in computer monitors and television screens, red is very variable, but some systems may apply color correction (so that a standardized "red" is produced that is not in fact full intensity of only the red colorant). In HSV color space, red has a hue of 0° or 360°.

In ancient China, red was the symbol of fire and the south, and is one of the main five classical colors.

In Chinese culture and Chinese symbolism, red is the color of good luck and success, and is used for decoration and wedding attire (during the traditional half of the wedding ceremony, while the bridal attire in the modern half is usually white). Money in Chinese societies is traditionally given in red packets. Stock market gains in China and other East Asian countries are displayed in red, while losses are displayed in green.

Red is considered holy in some parts of Sub-saharan Africa. In these regions women are forbidden to wear red clothes.

In Russia, red represents beauty. The Russian word for beauty derived from the word "red" and has the same root.

In English heraldry, red (called gules) denoted ardent affection or love, while crimson (blood-color) stood for boldness, enthusiasm, or impetuosity.

Red is one of the Christmas colors, along with green, gold, and silver. Santa Claus has a red costume.

Red, as well as or in combination with the colors rose, pink, and/or magenta, symbolizes Valentine's Day.